Many of our decisions are made on the basis of imperfect or ‘noisy’ information . A longstanding goal in neuroscience is to work out how such noise affects three aspects of decision-making: the accuracy ( or appropriateness ) of a choice , the speed at which the choice is made , and the decision-maker’s confidence that they have chosen correctly . One theory of decision-making is that the brain simultaneously accumulates evidence for each of the options it is considering , until one option exceeds a threshold and is declared the ‘winner’ . This theory is known as bounded evidence accumulation . It predicts that increasing the noisiness of the available information decreases the accuracy of decisions made in response . Counterintuitively , it also predicts that such an increase in noise speeds up decision-making and increases confidence levels . Zylberberg et al . have now tested these predictions experimentally by getting human volunteers and monkeys to perform a series of trials where they had to decide whether a set of randomly moving dots moved to the left or to the right overall . Using a newly developed method , the noisiness of the dot motion could be changed between trials . The effectiveness of this technique was confirmed by recording the activity of neurons in the region of the monkey brain that processes visual motion information . After each trial , the humans rated their confidence in their decision . By comparison , the monkeys could indicate that they were not confident in a decision by opting for a guaranteed small reward on certain trials ( instead of the larger reward they received when they correctly indicated the direction of motion of the dots ) . In both humans and monkeys , increasing the noisiness associated with the movement of the dots led to faster and more confident decision-making , just as the bounded evidence accumulation framework predicts . Furthermore , the results presented by Zylberberg et al . suggest that the brain does not always gauge how reliable evidence is in order to fine-tune decisions . Now that the role of noise in decision-making is better understood , future experiments could attempt to reveal how artificial manipulations of the brain contribute both information and noise to a decision . Other experiments might ascertain when the brain can learn that noisy information should invite slower , more cautious decisions .